Feat: Add AVD Example single-dc-l3ls (#1849)
aristanetworks/ansible-avd: ansible_collections/arista/avd/examples/single-dc-l3ls/README.md

- [Specifying endpoint connectivity in the EVPN/VXLAN Fabric](#specifying-endpoint-connectivity-in-the-evpnvxlan-fabric)
- [The playbook](#the-playbook)
  - [Executing the playbook](#executing-the-playbook)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Introduction

This example is meant to be used as the logical second step introducing Ansible AVD to new users, directly following the [Introduction to Ansible and AVD](https://avd.sh/en/stable/docs/getting-started/intro-to-ansible-and-avd.html) section.
The idea is that new users with access to virtual switches (using Arista vEOS-lab or cEOS) can learn how to generate configuration and documentation for a complete fabric environment. Users with access to physical switches will have to adapt a few settings. This is all documented inline in the comments included in the YAML files.

The example includes and describes all the Ansible AVD files and their content used to build a Layer 3 Leaf Spine (L3LS) EVPN/VXLAN network covering a single DC, using the following:

- Two (virtual) spine switches.
- Two sets of (virtual) leaf switches, serving endpoints such as servers.

> - Two (virtual) layer2-only switches used for out of band management (iLO/LOM etc.) connectivity to the servers.

Reviewer: it is not really out of band.
```suggestion
- Two (virtual) layer2-only switches often used for management connectivity to the servers.
```

- [Setting fabric-wide configuration parameters](#setting-fabric-wide-configuration-parameters)
- [Setting device specific configuration parameters](#setting-device-specific-configuration-parameters)
- [Specifying network services (VRFs and VLANs) in the EVPN/VXLAN Fabric](#specifying-network-services-vrfs-and-vlans-in-the-evpnvxlan-fabric)
- [Specifying endpoint connectivity in the EVPN/VXLAN Fabric](#specifying-endpoint-connectivity-in-the-evpnvxlan-fabric)
- [The playbook](#the-playbook)
  - [Executing the playbook](#executing-the-playbook)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Introduction

This example is meant to be used as the logical second step introducing Ansible AVD to new users, directly following the [Introduction to Ansible and AVD](https://avd.sh/en/stable/docs/getting-started/intro-to-ansible-and-avd.html) section.
The idea is that new users with access to virtual switches (using Arista vEOS-lab or cEOS) can learn how to generate configuration and documentation for a complete fabric environment. Users with access to physical switches will have to adapt a few settings. This is all documented inline in the comments included in the YAML files.

> The example includes and describes all the Ansible AVD files and their content used to build a Layer 3 Leaf Spine (L3LS) EVPN/VXLAN network covering a single DC, using the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The example includes and describes all the Ansible AVD files and their content used to build a Layer 3 Leaf Spine (L3LS) EVPN/VXLAN Symmetric IRB network covering a single DC, using the following:
```

- Two (virtual) spine switches.
- Two sets of (virtual) leaf switches, serving endpoints such as servers.
- Two (virtual) layer2-only switches used for out of band management (iLO/LOM etc.) connectivity to the servers.

The example is meant as a simple starting point and more advanced examples will build upon this design to hopefully reduce any confusion when progressing.

> Integration with CloudVision isn't included in this example to keep everything as simple as possible, hence the Ansible host will communicate directly with the switches using eAPI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integration with CloudVision is not included in this example to keep everything as simple as possible, hence the Ansible host will communicate directly with the switches using eAPI.
```

## Installation

To actually use this example in practice you must:

> - Ensure you have followed the installation guide for Ansible AVD found here on https://avd.sh.

Reviewer: Please insert a link directly to the installation guide (use relative link)

Author: Done

- Run the following playbook to copy the examples to your current working directory, for example `ansible-avd-examples`:

`ansible-playbook arista.avd.install_examples`

This will result in the following:

```shell

>  ~/ansible-avd-examples# ansible-playbook arista.avd.install_examples.yml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 ~/ansible-avd-examples# ansible-playbook arista.avd.install_examples
```

- A username and password with the proper access privileges.

Below is shown the basic configuration file for `dc1-leaf1a`:

```shell
! ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/switch-basic-configurations/dc1-leaf1a-basic-configuration.txt
! Basic EOS config
!
! Hostname of the device
hostname dc1-leaf1a
!
! Configures username and password for the ansible user
username ansible privilege 15 role network-admin secret sha512 $6$7u4j1rkb3VELgcZE$EJt2Qff8kd/TapRoci0XaIZsL4tFzgq1YZBLD9c6f/knXzvcYY0NcMKndZeCv0T268knGKhOEwZAxqKjlMm920
!
! Defines the VRF for MGMT
vrf instance MGMT
!
! Defines the settings for the Management1 interface through which Ansible reaches the device
interface Management1
   description oob_management
   no shutdown
   vrf MGMT
   ! IP address - must be set uniquely per device
   ip address 172.16.1.101/24
!
! Static default route for VRF MGMT
ip route vrf MGMT 0.0.0.0/0 172.16.1.1
!
! Enables API access in VRF MGMT
management api http-commands
   protocol https
   no shutdown
   !
   vrf MGMT
      no shutdown
!
end
!
! Save configuration to flash
copy running-config startup-config
```

> In the folder `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/switch-basic-configurations/` you will find a file per device you can use for the initial configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the folder `single-dc-l3ls/switch-basic-configurations/` you will find a file per device you can use for the initial configuration.
```

## Ansible inventory, group vars and naming scheme

The following drawing shows a graphic overview of the Ansible inventory, group variables and naming scheme used in this example:

![Figure: Ansible inventory and vars](images/single-dc-inventory-and-vars.png)

> Please note, the two servers (`dc1-leaf1-server1` and `dc1-leaf2-server1`) at the bottom ***aren't*** configured by Ansible AVD, but the switch ports used to connect to the servers are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note, the two servers (`dc1-leaf1-server1` and `dc1-leaf2-server1`) at the bottom **are not** configured by Ansible AVD, but the switch ports used to connect to the servers are.
```

Group names use uppercase and underscores:

- FABRIC
- DC1
- DC1_SPINES
- DC1_L3_LEAVES
- DC1_L2_LEAVES

All hostnames use lowercase and dashes for example:

- dc1-spine1
- dc1-leaf1a
- dc1-leaf2c

The drawing also shows the relationships between groups and their children:

- For example, `dc1-spine1` and `dc1-spine2` are both children of the group called `DC1_SPINES`.

Additionally groups themselves can be children of another group for example:

> - `DC1_L3_LEAVES` is a group consisting of the groups `DC1_LEAF1` and `DC1_LEAF2`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DC1_L3_LEAVES` is a group consisting of the groups `DC1_LEAF1` and `DC1_LEAF2`
```

> - while `DC1_L3_LEAVES` is also a child of the group `DC1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DC1_L3_LEAVES` is also a child of the group `DC1`.
```

This naming convention makes it possible to easily extend anything, but as always, this can be changed based on your preferences. Just ensure that the names of all groups and hosts are unique.

### Contents of the inventory.yml file

The following describes the full `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/inventory.yml` file used to describe the topology shown above.

> It's important that the hostnames specified in the inventory exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. To test this, you must be able to successfully ping the host, for example, `ping dc1-spine1` from your Ansible host. Alternatively, if there is no DNS available, or if devices need to be reached using a fully-qualified domain-name (FQDN) define `ansible_host` to be an IP address or FQDN for each device - see dc1-spine1/2 below for an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important that the hostnames specified in the inventory exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. To test this, you must be able to successfully ping the host, for example, `ping dc1-spine1` from your Ansible host. Alternatively, if there is no DNS available, or if devices need to be reached using a fully-qualified domain-name (FQDN), define `ansible_host` to be an IP address or FQDN for each device - see dc1-spine1/2 below for an example:
```

              hosts:
                dc1-leaf1a:
                dc1-leaf1b:
                dc1-leaf2a:
                dc1-leaf2b:
            DC1_L2_LEAVES:
              hosts:
                dc1-leaf1c:
                dc1-leaf2c:

        NETWORK_SERVICES:
          children:
            DC1_L3_LEAVES:
            DC1_L2_LEAVES:
        CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS:
          children:
            DC1_L3_LEAVES:
            DC1_L2_LEAVES:
```

The `NETWORK_SERVICES` section does two things:

1. It references the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/NETWORK_SERVICES.yml` group variable file that specifies the VRFs and VLANs used in the entire fabric.
2. Defines the scope of the fabric where these VRFs and VLANs are applied, in this case the two groups `DC1_L3_LEAVES` and `DC1_L2_LEAVES`

The `CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS` section also does two things:

1. It references the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS.yml` group variable file that specifies all endpoints, which would typically be servers.
2. Defines the scope of where these endpoints are connected to the fabric, in this case the two groups `DC1_L3_LEAVES` and `DC1_L2_LEAVES`.

## Defining device types

> Since we're building a L3LS network, we must tell Ansible AVD which devices are spines, L3 leaves, L2 leaves etc. We've already grouped the devices in the inventory and so in this example this is done using the group variable files with the following names and content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we're building a L3LS network, we must tell Ansible AVD which devices are spines, L3 leaves, L2 leaves etc. We have already grouped the devices in the inventory and so in this example this is done using the group variable files with the following names and content:
```

```

`ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/DC1_L2_LEAVES.yml`

```yml
---
type: l2leaf
```

For example, this means that all switches that are children of the DC1_SPINES group defined in the inventory, will be of the type `spine`.

## Setting fabric-wide configuration parameters

In the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/FABRIC.yml` file, we define generic settings that apply to all children of the `FABRIC` group as defined in the inventory described earlier.

The first section defines how the Ansible host connects to the devices. In this case we're specifying that:

- The Ansible host must use eAPI via HTTPS.
- Network OS which in this case is Arista EOS.
- The username/password combo.
- How to escalate privileges to get write access.
- We're using SSL.
- We're not validating certs.

```yml
ansible_connection: ansible.netcommon.httpapi
ansible_network_os: arista.eos.eos
ansible_user: ansible
ansible_password: ansible
ansible_become: true
ansible_become_method: enable
ansible_httpapi_use_ssl: true
ansible_httpapi_validate_certs: false
```

In the next section we specify variables that generate configuration to be applied to all devices in the fabric:

> - The name of the fabric for internal Ansible AVD use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The name of the fabric for internal Ansible AVD use. This name *must* match the name of an Ansible Group covering all network devices.
```

- Local users/passwords and their privilege levels. In this case the "ansible" user is set with the password "ansible".
- BGP peer groups and their passwords (all passwords are "arista").

> - Point-to-point interface MTU, in this case it's set to 1500 since the example is using vEOS, but if using hardware this should be set to 9214 instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Point-to-point interface MTU, in this case it's set to 1500 since the example is using vEOS, but when using hardware this should be set to 9214 instead.
```

      - graceful-restart restart-time 300
      - graceful-restart

  nodes:
    dc1-spine1:
      id: 1
      mgmt_ip: 172.16.1.11/24

    dc1-spine2:
      id: 2
      mgmt_ip: 172.16.1.12/24
```

Next we do the same, but this time for the L3 leaf switches. As you can see, significantly more settings need to be set compared to the spine switches:

- Again a number of default settings are defined:
  - `vtep_loopback_ipv4_pool` defines the IP scope from which AVD assigns IPv4 addresses for the VTEP (Loopback1).
  - `uplink_interfaces` defines the interfaces used locally on the leaf switches.
  - `uplink_switches` defines the uplink switches which in this case are dc1-spine1 and dc1-spine2. Note that the `uplink_interfaces` and `uplink_switches` are paired vertically.
  - `uplink_ipv4_pool` defines the IP scope from which AVD assigns IPv4 addresses for the uplink interfaces that we just defined.
  - `mlag_interfaces` defines the MLAG interfaces used on each leaf switch, in this case Ethernet3 and Ethernet4. These two interfaces will form PortChannel3 used for the MLAG peer link. Note that PortChannel3 is selected, since the first interface is Ethernet3.

>   - `mlag_peer_ipv4_pool` defines the IP scope from which AVD assigns IPv4 addresses for the MLAG peer link interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `mlag_peer_ipv4_pool` defines the IP scope from which AVD assigns IPv4 addresses for the MLAG peer link interface VLAN4094.
```

  - `mlag_peer_l3_ipv4_pool` defines the IP scope from which AVD assigns IPv4 addresses for the iBGP peering established between the two leaf switches via the SVI/IRB interface VLAN4093.
  - `virtual_router_mac_address` defines the MAC address used for the anycast gateway used on the various subnets. This is the MAC address that connected endpoints will learn when ARPing for their default gateway.
  - `spanning_tree_priority` sets the spanning-tree priority. Since spanning-tree in a L3LS network is effectively only running locally on the switch, we can re-use the same priority across all L3 leaf switches.
  - `spanning_tree_mode` defines the spanning-tree mode, in this case MSTP, which is the default. Other modes are supported should they be required, for example, for connectivity to legacy or third party vendor environments.
- `node_groups` is used to define settings common to more than one node. For leaf switches, when exactly two nodes are part of a node group, AVD will by default automatically generate MLAG configuration.
- `bgp_as` is defined just once since an MLAG pair shares a single BGP AS number.

> - `uplink_switch_interfaces` defines the interfaces used on the uplink switches (Ethernet1 on dc1-spine1 and dc1-spine2 in this example). By defining which spine interfaces the leaf is connected to under the leaf switch's settings it makes addition and removal of leaf switches much easier - there is no need to add/remove any settings under the spine switch section; AVD takes care of that for you.  This child device/parent device hierarchy also applies to L2 leaves and L3 leaves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `uplink_switch_interfaces` defines the interfaces used on the uplink switches (Ethernet1 on dc1-spine1 and dc1-spine2 in this example). By defining which spine interfaces the leaf is connected to under the leaf switch's settings it makes addition and removal of leaf switches much easier - there is no need to add/remove any settings under the spine switch section; AVD takes care of that for you. This child device/parent device hierarchy also applies to L2 leaves and L3 leaves.
```

            - Ethernet3
        dc1-leaf2b:
          id: 4
          mgmt_ip: 172.16.1.104/24
          uplink_switch_interfaces:
            - Ethernet4
            - Ethernet4
```

Finally we do the same, but this time for the L2 leaf switches. As should be clear, a L2 leaf switch is much simpler than a L3 switch, hence there are fewer settings to define.

```yml
l2leaf:
  defaults:
    platform: vEOS-lab
    uplink_interfaces: ['Ethernet1', 'Ethernet2']
    spanning_tree_mode: mstp

  node_groups:
    DC1_L2_LEAF1:
      uplink_switches: ['dc1-leaf1a', 'dc1-leaf1b']
      nodes:
        dc1-leaf1c:
          id: 1
          mgmt_ip: 172.16.1.151/24
          uplink_switch_interfaces:
            - Ethernet8
            - Ethernet8

    DC1_L2_LEAF2:
      uplink_switches: ['dc1-leaf2a', 'dc1-leaf2b']
      nodes:
        dc1-leaf2c:
          id: 2
          mgmt_ip: 172.16.1.152/24
          uplink_switch_interfaces:
            - Ethernet8
            - Ethernet8
```

## Specifying network services (VRFs and VLANs) in the EVPN/VXLAN Fabric

Let's take a closer look at the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/NETWORK_SERVICES.yml` file shown below.

> It's in here that we define all services that exist in the entire fabric or in other words all VRFs and VLANs. This means that regardless where you want a given VRF or VLAN to exist you define its existence here, but you don't define ***where*** in the fabric it exists. That was done at the bottom of the inventory file previously described in the [Inventory](#inventory) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's in here that we define all services that exist in the entire fabric or in other words all VRFs and VLANs. This means that regardless where you want a given VRF or VLAN to exist you define its existence here, but you don't define ***where*** in the fabric it exists. That was done at the bottom of the inventory file previously described in the [Inventory](#inventory) section.

Ansible AVD offers granular control of where Tenants and VLANs are configured using `tags` and `filter`. Those areas are not covered in this basic example.
```

      vlans: 11-12,21-22
      native_vlan: 4092
      mode: trunk
      spanning_tree_portfast: edge
      port_channel:
        description: PortChannel dc1-leaf2-server1
        mode: active

    - type: ilo
      server_ports: [ iLO ]
      switch_ports: [ Ethernet5 ]
      switches: [ dc1-leaf2c ]
      vlans: 11
      mode: access
      spanning_tree_portfast: edge
```

This defines the settings for the relevant switch ports to which the endpoints connect, in this case the two servers `dc1-leaf1-server1` and `dc1-leaf2-server1`.

If we look closer at the definitions for `dc1-leaf1-server1`, we see the following:

```yml
  dc1-leaf1-server1:
    adapters:
    - type: server
      server_ports: [ PCI1, PCI2 ]
      switch_ports: [ Ethernet5, Ethernet5 ]
      switches: [ dc1-leaf1a, dc1-leaf1b ]
      vlans: 11-12,21-22
      native_vlan: 4092
      mode: trunk
      spanning_tree_portfast: edge
      port_channel:
        description: PortChannel dc1-leaf1-server1
        mode: active

    - type: ilo
      server_ports: [ iLO ]
      switch_ports: [ Ethernet5 ]
      switches: [ dc1-leaf1c ]
      vlans: 11
      mode: access
      spanning_tree_portfast: edge
```

> - The relevant `adapters` are defined:

Reviewer: in this example you describe the settings below the yaml. In previous sections you described it above. I feel this style (below) is easier to follow.

Author: Updated

  - `switch_ports` define the interfaces used in the switches. In this example the server is dual-connected to Ethernet5 and Ethernet5. These two ports exist on switch dc1-leaf1a and dc1-leaf1b defined in the following line.
  - `switches` define the switches used, in this case dc1-leaf1a and dc1-leaf1b. Note that the `server_ports`, `switch_ports` and `switches` definitions are paired vertically.
  - `vlans` define which VLANs are allowed on the switch_ports, in this case it's two ranges, VLAN11-12 and VLAN21-22 for the dual-attached server ports and VLAN11 for the iLO port.
  - `native_vlan` specifies the native VLAN when the switch port mode is set to trunk.
  - `mode` is set to trunk for the dual-attached server ports and access for the iLO port.
  - `spanning_tree_portfast` defines whether we want the switch port to be a spanning-tree edge port or a network port.
  - `port-channel` defines the description and mode for the port-channel.

## The playbook

In this example the playbook looks like the following:

```yml
- name: Run AVD
  hosts: FABRIC

>   ansible.builtin.gather_facts: false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  gather_facts: false
```

### Executing the playbook

The execution of the playbook should show you the following output:

```shell
user@ubuntu:~/Documents/git_projects/ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls$ ansible-playbook playbook.yml

PLAY [Run AVD] *****************************************************************************************************************************************************************************

TASK [arista.avd.eos_designs : Collection arista.avd version 3.5.0 loaded from /home/user/.ansible/collections/ansible_collections] ******************************************************
ok: [dc1-leaf1a]

TASK [arista.avd.eos_designs : Create required output directories if not present] **********************************************************************************************************
ok: [dc1-leaf1a -> localhost] => (item=/home/user/Documents/git_projects/ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/intended/structured_configs)
ok: [dc1-leaf1a -> localhost] => (item=/home/user/Documents/git_projects/ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/documentation/fabric)
(...)
```

If you are not seeing a similar output to the showed one, make sure:

> 1. You have `ansible-core` and not `ansible` installed.

Reviewer: Installing the full "ansible" package can be ok, since it also contains ansible-core.
```suggestion
1. You meet the documented [requirements](../../docs/installation/requirements.md) 
```

2. You have the latest `arista.avd` collection installed.

## Troubleshooting

> If you do the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### EVPN not working

If you do the following steps:
```

1. Manually copy/paste the switch-basic-configuration to the devices.
2. Run the playbook and push the generated configuration to the fabric.
3. Login to a leaf device, for example, dc1-leaf1a and run the command `show bgp evpn summary` to view EVPN routes.

Then you will see the following error message:

```shell
dc1-leaf1a#show bgp evpn summ
% Not supported
dc1-leaf1a#
```

> This is caused by Ansible AVD pushing the configuration line `service routing protocols model multi-agent`, which enables Arista's own routing process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is caused by Ansible AVD pushing the configuration line `service routing protocols model multi-agent`, which enables the multi-agent routing process supporting EVPN.
```

- Two (virtual) layer2-only switches often used for management connectivity to the servers.

The example is meant as a simple starting point and more advanced examples will build upon this design to hopefully reduce any confusion when progressing.

Integration with CloudVision is not included in this example to keep everything as simple as possible, hence the Ansible host will communicate directly with the switches using eAPI.

## Installation

To actually use this example in practice you must:

- Ensure you have followed the installation guide for Ansible AVD found [here](../../docs/installation/collection-installation.md).
- Run the following playbook to copy the examples to your current working directory, for example `ansible-avd-examples`:

`ansible-playbook arista.avd.install_examples`

This will show in the following:

```shell
 ~/ansible-avd-examples# ansible-playbook arista.avd.install_examples

PLAY [Install Examples]***************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************

> TASK [Copy all examples to /ansible-avd-examples]*****************************************************************************************************************************************************

Reviewer 3: the path does not look to match the one from line 52

Author: Good catch - adjusted manually to not expose my long and cluttered directory structure :-D
Will be updated

| DC1                                                 | 10.255.255.0/26             |
| **Loopback0 interfaces used for EVPN peering**      | 10.255.0.0/27               |
| **Loopback1 interfaces used for VTEP**              | **(Leaf switches)**         |
| DC1                                                 | 10.255.1.0/27               |
| **VTEP Loopbacks used for diagnostics**             | **(Leaf switches)**         |
| VRF10                                               | 10.255.10.0/27              |
| VRF11                                               | 10.255.11.0/27              |
| **SVIs (interface vlan...)**                        | **10.10.`<VLAN-ID>`.0/24**  |
| For example `interface VLAN11` has the IP address:  | 10.10.11.1                  |
| **MLAG Peer-link (interface vlan 4094)**            | **(Leaf switches)**         |
| DC1                                                 | 10.255.1.64/27              |
| **MLAG iBGP Peering (interface vlan 4093)**         | **(Leaf switches)**         |
| DC1                                                 | 10.255.1.96/27              |

### BGP Design

> The following drawing shows the BGP Design used in this example. The orange dashed lines illustrate the eBGP point-to-point peerings used for the underlay, while the blue dotted lines illustrates the eBGP multi-hop peerings between Loopback0 interfaces used for the EVPN overlay. Finally, the green dashed lines illustrates the iBGP peerings between MLAG peers:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following drawing shows the BGP Design used in this example. The orange dashed lines illustrate the eBGP point-to-point peerings used for the underlay, while the blue dotted lines illustrate the eBGP multi-hop peerings between Loopback0 interfaces used for the EVPN overlay. Finally, the green dashed lines illustrate the iBGP peerings between MLAG peers:
```

The following drawing shows a graphic overview of the Ansible inventory, group variables and naming scheme used in this example:

![Figure: Ansible inventory and vars](images/single-dc-inventory-and-vars.png)

Please note, the two servers (`dc1-leaf1-server1` and `dc1-leaf2-server1`) at the bottom **are not** configured by Ansible AVD, but the switch ports used to connect to the servers are.

Group names use uppercase and underscores:

- FABRIC
- DC1
- DC1_SPINES
- DC1_L3_LEAVES
- DC1_L2_LEAVES

All hostnames use lowercase and dashes for example:

- dc1-spine1
- dc1-leaf1a
- dc1-leaf2c

The drawing also shows the relationships between groups and their children:

- For example, `dc1-spine1` and `dc1-spine2` are both children of the group called `DC1_SPINES`.

Additionally groups themselves can be children of another group for example:

- `DC1_L3_LEAVES` is a group consisting of the groups `DC1_LEAF1` and `DC1_LEAF2`
- `DC1_L3_LEAVES` is also a child of the group `DC1`.

This naming convention makes it possible to easily extend anything, but as always, this can be changed based on your preferences. Just ensure that the names of all groups and hosts are unique.

> ### Contents of the inventory.yml file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Content of the inventory.yml file
```

> The following describes the full `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/inventory.yml` file used to describe the topology shown above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section describes the full `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/inventory.yml` file used to represent the topology shown above.
```

> It's important that the hostnames specified in the inventory exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. To test this, you must be able to successfully ping the host, for example, `ping dc1-spine1` from your Ansible host.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is important that the hostnames specified in the inventory exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. To test this, you must be able to successfully ping the host, for example, `ping dc1-spine1` from your Ansible host.
```

        NETWORK_SERVICES:
          children:
            DC1_L3_LEAVES:
            DC1_L2_LEAVES:
        CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS:
          children:
            DC1_L3_LEAVES:
            DC1_L2_LEAVES:
```

The above is what is included in this example, *purely* to make it as simple as possible to get started.
However, going forward we urge you not to carry over this practice in a production environment, where an inventory file for an identical topology should look as follows:

```yml
---
all:
  children:
    FABRIC:
      children:
        DC1:
          children:
            DC1_SPINES:
              hosts:
                dc1-spine1:
                dc1-spine2:
            DC1_L3_LEAVES:
              hosts:
                dc1-leaf1a:
                dc1-leaf1b:
                dc1-leaf2a:
                dc1-leaf2b:
            DC1_L2_LEAVES:
              hosts:
                dc1-leaf1c:
                dc1-leaf2c:

        NETWORK_SERVICES:
          children:
            DC1_L3_LEAVES:
            DC1_L2_LEAVES:
        CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS:
          children:
            DC1_L3_LEAVES:
            DC1_L2_LEAVES:
```

The `NETWORK_SERVICES` section does two things:

> 1. It references the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/NETWORK_SERVICES.yml` group variable file that specifies the VRFs and VLANs used in the entire fabric.

Reviewer 3: 1. The path does not look correct - is it missing `group_vars`?
2. Technically the section does not "reference" anything, it creates a group named "NETWORK_SERVICES" and ansible variables resolution strategy makes the group_vars file with the group name being applied to the devices which are part of this group.

Author: Great catch! I've rephrased it, please take another look.

Reviewer 3: Good for me! resolving this

2. Defines the scope of the fabric where these VRFs and VLANs are applied, in this case the two groups `DC1_L3_LEAVES` and `DC1_L2_LEAVES`.

The `CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS` section also does two things:

1. It references the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS.yml` group variable file that specifies all endpoints, which would typically be servers.
2. Defines the scope of where these endpoints are connected to the fabric, in this case the two groups `DC1_L3_LEAVES` and `DC1_L2_LEAVES`.

## Defining device types

> Since we're building a L3LS network, we must tell Ansible AVD which devices are spines, L3 leaves, L2 leaves etc. We have already grouped the devices in the inventory and so in this example this is done using the group variable files with the following names and content:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since we are building a L3LS network, we must tell Ansible AVD which devices are spines, L3 leaves, L2 leaves etc. We have already grouped the devices in the inventory and so in this example this is done using the group variable files with the following names and content:
```

`ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/DC1_SPINES.yml`

```yml
---
type: spine
```

`ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/DC1_L3_LEAVES.yml`

```yml
---
type: l3leaf
```

`ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/DC1_L2_LEAVES.yml`

```yml
---
type: l2leaf
```

> For example, this means that all switches that are children of the DC1_SPINES group defined in the inventory, will be of the type `spine`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, this means that all switches that are children of the DC1_SPINES group defined in the inventory will be of the type `spine`.
```

## Setting fabric-wide configuration parameters

> In the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/FABRIC.yml` file, we define generic settings that apply to all children of the `FABRIC` group as defined in the inventory described earlier.

Reviewer 3: a more personal generic comment on the style of the README but it is preferable to avoid using `we` when writing documentation (though I agree that I arrive quite late in the review cycle so you can ignore this :) )

Author: Thanks for the opinion. I've re-written the doc. Please look again.

The first section defines how the Ansible host connects to the devices:

```yml
ansible_connection: ansible.netcommon.httpapi
ansible_network_os: arista.eos.eos
ansible_user: ansible
ansible_password: ansible
ansible_become: true
ansible_become_method: enable
ansible_httpapi_use_ssl: true
ansible_httpapi_validate_certs: false
```

> In this case we're specifying that:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case we are specifying that:
```

- The Ansible host must use eAPI via HTTPS.
- Network OS which in this case is Arista EOS.
- The username/password combo.
- How to escalate privileges to get write access.
- We're using SSL.

> - We're not validating certs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Use SSL.
- Do not validate SSL certificates.
```

In the next section we specify variables that generate configuration to be applied to all devices in the fabric:

```yml
fabric_name: FABRIC

underlay_routing_protocol: EBGP
overlay_routing_protocol: EBGP

local_users:
  ansible:
    privilege: 15
    role: network-admin
    sha512_password: $6$7u4j1rkb3VELgcZE$EJt2Qff8kd/TapRoci0XaIZsL4tFzgq1YZBLD9c6f/knXzvcYY0NcMKndZeCv0T268knGKhOEwZAxqKjlMm920
  admin:
    privilege: 15
    role: network-admin
    no_password: true

bgp_peer_groups:
  evpn_overlay_peers:
    password: Q4fqtbqcZ7oQuKfuWtNGRQ==
  ipv4_underlay_peers:
    password: 7x4B4rnJhZB438m9+BrBfQ==
  mlag_ipv4_underlay_peer:
    password: 4b21pAdCvWeAqpcKDFMdWw==

p2p_uplinks_mtu: 1500
```

- The name of the fabric for internal Ansible AVD use. This name *must* match the name of an Ansible Group covering all network devices.

> - Local users/passwords and their privilege levels. In this case the "ansible" user is set with the password "ansible".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Local users/passwords and their privilege levels. In this case the `ansible` user is set with the password `ansible`.
```

- BGP peer groups and their passwords (all passwords are "arista").

> - Point-to-point interface MTU, in this case it's set to 1500 since the example is using vEOS, but when using hardware this should be set to 9214 instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Point-to-point interface MTU, in this case it is set to 1500 since the example is using vEOS, but when using hardware this should be set to 9214 instead.
```

  - `mlag_peer_l3_ipv4_pool` defines the IP scope from which AVD assigns IPv4 addresses for the iBGP peering established between the two leaf switches via the SVI/IRB interface VLAN4093.
  - `virtual_router_mac_address` defines the MAC address used for the anycast gateway used on the various subnets. This is the MAC address that connected endpoints will learn when ARPing for their default gateway.
  - `spanning_tree_priority` sets the spanning-tree priority. Since spanning-tree in a L3LS network is effectively only running locally on the switch, we can re-use the same priority across all L3 leaf switches.
  - `spanning_tree_mode` defines the spanning-tree mode, in this case MSTP, which is the default. Other modes are supported should they be required, for example, for connectivity to legacy or third party vendor environments.
- `node_groups` is used to define settings common to more than one node. For leaf switches, when exactly two nodes are part of a node group, AVD will by default automatically generate MLAG configuration.
- `bgp_as` is defined just once since an MLAG pair shares a single BGP AS number.

> - `uplink_switch_interfaces` defines the interfaces used on the uplink switches (Ethernet1 on dc1-spine1 and dc1-spine2 in this example). By defining which spine interfaces the leaf is connected to under the leaf switch's settings it makes addition and removal of leaf switches much easier - there is no need to add/remove any settings under the spine switch section; AVD takes care of that for you. This child device/parent device hierarchy also applies to L2 leaves and L3 leaves.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `uplink_switch_interfaces` defines the interfaces used on the uplink switches (Ethernet1 on dc1-spine1 and dc1-spine2 in this example). By defining which spine interfaces the leaf is connected to under the leaf switch settings, it makes addition and removal of leaf switches much easier. There is no need to add/remove any settings under the spine switch section, AVD takes care of that for you. This child device/parent device hierarchy also applies to L2 leaves and L3 leaves.
```

> - `uplink_switch_interfaces` defines the interfaces used on the uplink switches (Ethernet1 on dc1-spine1 and dc1-spine2 in this example). By defining which spine interfaces the leaf is connected to under the leaf switch's settings it makes addition and removal of leaf switches much easier - there is no need to add/remove any settings under the spine switch section; AVD takes care of that for you. This child device/parent device hierarchy also applies to L2 leaves and L3 leaves.

Reviewer 3: These two bullet points are under `node_groups`, should they be indented?

Author: Fixed

Finally we do the same, but this time for the L2 leaf switches:

```yml
l2leaf:
  defaults:
    platform: vEOS-lab
    uplink_interfaces: ['Ethernet1', 'Ethernet2']
    spanning_tree_mode: mstp

  node_groups:
    DC1_L2_LEAF1:
      uplink_switches: ['dc1-leaf1a', 'dc1-leaf1b']
      nodes:
        dc1-leaf1c:
          id: 1
          mgmt_ip: 172.16.1.151/24
          uplink_switch_interfaces:
            - Ethernet8
            - Ethernet8

    DC1_L2_LEAF2:
      uplink_switches: ['dc1-leaf2a', 'dc1-leaf2b']
      nodes:
        dc1-leaf2c:
          id: 2
          mgmt_ip: 172.16.1.152/24
          uplink_switch_interfaces:
            - Ethernet8
            - Ethernet8
```

>  As should be clear, a L2 leaf switch is much simpler than a L3 switch, hence there are fewer settings to define.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As should be clear, a L2 leaf switch is much simpler than a L3 switch, hence there are fewer settings to define.
```

## Specifying network services (VRFs and VLANs) in the EVPN/VXLAN Fabric

Let's take a closer look at the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/NETWORK_SERVICES.yml` file shown below.

```yml
---
tenants:
  TENANT1:
    mac_vrf_vni_base: 10000
    vrfs:
      VRF10:
        vrf_vni: 10
        vtep_diagnostic:
          loopback: 10
          loopback_ip_range: 10.255.10.0/27
        svis:
          "11":
            name: VRF1_VLAN11
            enabled: true
            ip_address_virtual: 10.10.11.1/24
          "12":
            name: VRF1_VLAN12
            enabled: true
            ip_address_virtual: 10.10.12.1/24
      VRF11:
        vrf_vni: 11
        vtep_diagnostic:
          loopback: 11
          loopback_ip_range: 10.255.11.0/27
        svis:
          "21":
            name: VRF2_VLAN21
            enabled: true
            ip_address_virtual: 10.10.21.1/24
          "22":
            name: VRF2_VLAN22
            enabled: true
            ip_address_virtual: 10.10.22.1/24

    l2vlans:
      "3401":
        name: L2_VLAN3401
      "3402":
        name: L2_VLAN3402
```

> It's in here that we define all services that exist in the entire fabric or in other words all VRFs and VLANs. This means that regardless where you want a given VRF or VLAN to exist you define its existence here, but you don't define ***where*** in the fabric it exists. That was done at the bottom of the inventory file previously described in the [Inventory](#inventory) section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is in here that we define all services that exist in the entire fabric or in other words all VRFs and VLANs. This means that regardless where you want a given VRF or VLAN to exist you define its existence here, but you do not define ***where*** in the fabric it exists. That was done at the bottom of the inventory file previously described in the [Inventory](#inventory) section.
```

Ansible AVD offers granular control of where Tenants and VLANs are configured using `tags` and `filter`. Those areas are not covered in this basic example.

> We've specified a single tenant called `TENANT1`. The first thing we specify is the base number (`10000`) used to automatically generate the L2VNI numbers, L2VNI = base number + VLAN-id. For example, L2VNI for VLAN11 = 10000 + 11 = 10011.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have specified a single tenant called `TENANT1`. The first thing we specify is the base number (`10000`) used to automatically generate the L2VNI numbers, `L2VNI = base number + VLAN-id`. For example, L2VNI for VLAN11 = 10000 + 11 = 10011.
```

            enabled: true
            ip_address_virtual: 10.10.12.1/24
```

This defines `VRF10`, with a L3VNI of `10` and two VLANs (`VLAN11` and `VLAN12`).
Each VLAN has a name and a virtual IP address assigned, which will be used as the default gateway for that particular VLAN.

You will probably notice this configuration defined under `VRF10`:

```yml
        vtep_diagnostic:
          loopback: 10
          loopback_ip_range: 10.255.10.0/27
```

This enables more user friendly diagnostics for troubleshooting purposes, by defining a specific loopback per VRF. This will create the following Arista EOS config, for example for dc1-leaf1a:

```shell
interface Loopback10
   description VRF10_VTEP_DIAGNOSTICS
   no shutdown
   vrf VRF10
   ip address 10.255.10.3/32
!
ip address virtual source-nat vrf VRF10 address 10.255.10.3
```

At the very bottom of the `NETWORK_SERVICES.yml` file we define two layer2-only VLANs (`VLAN3401` and `VLAN3402`). These VLANs are only bridged across the fabric, but never routed anywhere:

```yml
    l2vlans:
      "3401":
        name: L2_VLAN3401
      "3402":
        name: L2_VLAN3402
```

## Specifying endpoint connectivity in the EVPN/VXLAN Fabric

> As we saw in the previous section, we've now defined all VRFs and VLANs across the fabric. Let's take a closer look at the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS.yml` file, which specifies the connectivity for all endpoints in the fabric (typically servers):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As we saw in the previous section, we have now defined all VRFs and VLANs across the fabric. Let's take a closer look at the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS.yml` file, which specifies the connectivity for all endpoints in the fabric (typically servers):
```

        mode: active

    - type: ilo
      server_ports: [ iLO ]
      switch_ports: [ Ethernet5 ]
      switches: [ dc1-leaf2c ]
      vlans: 11
      mode: access
      spanning_tree_portfast: edge
```

This defines the settings for the relevant switch ports to which the endpoints connect, in this case the two servers `dc1-leaf1-server1` and `dc1-leaf2-server1`.

If we look closer at the definitions for `dc1-leaf1-server1`, we see the following:

```yml
  dc1-leaf1-server1:
    adapters:
    - type: server
      server_ports: [ PCI1, PCI2 ]
      switch_ports: [ Ethernet5, Ethernet5 ]
      switches: [ dc1-leaf1a, dc1-leaf1b ]
      vlans: 11-12,21-22
      native_vlan: 4092
      mode: trunk
      spanning_tree_portfast: edge
      port_channel:
        description: PortChannel dc1-leaf1-server1
        mode: active

    - type: ilo
      server_ports: [ iLO ]
      switch_ports: [ Ethernet5 ]
      switches: [ dc1-leaf1c ]
      vlans: 11
      mode: access
      spanning_tree_portfast: edge
```

- The relevant `adapters` are defined:
  - `type` set to `server` and `ilo` is purely for documentation and readability purposes. It has no operational significance.

>   - `server_ports` are defined purely for use in the interface descriptions on the switch. This doesn't configure anything on the server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `server_ports` are defined for use in the interface descriptions on the switch. This does not configure anything on the server.
```

  - `switch_ports` define the interfaces used in the switches. In this example the server is dual-connected to Ethernet5 and Ethernet5. These two ports exist on switch dc1-leaf1a and dc1-leaf1b defined in the following line.
  - `switches` define the switches used, in this case dc1-leaf1a and dc1-leaf1b. Note that the `server_ports`, `switch_ports` and `switches` definitions are paired vertically.

>   - `vlans` define which VLANs are allowed on the switch_ports, in this case it's two ranges, VLAN11-12 and VLAN21-22 for the dual-attached server ports and VLAN11 for the iLO port.

Reviewer 3: I guess it is really `defines` and not `define` given that these are variable names

Author: Fixed

>   - `switch_ports` define the interfaces used in the switches. In this example the server is dual-connected to Ethernet5 and Ethernet5. These two ports exist on switch dc1-leaf1a and dc1-leaf1b defined in the following line.
>   - `switches` define the switches used, in this case dc1-leaf1a and dc1-leaf1b. Note that the `server_ports`, `switch_ports` and `switches` definitions are paired vertically.
>   - `vlans` define which VLANs are allowed on the switch_ports, in this case it's two ranges, VLAN11-12 and VLAN21-22 for the dual-attached server ports and VLAN11 for the iLO port.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `switch_ports` define the interfaces used in the switches. In this example the server is dual-connected to Ethernet5 and Ethernet5. These two ports exist on switch dc1-leaf1a and dc1-leaf1b defined in the following line.
  - `switches` define the switches used, in this case dc1-leaf1a and dc1-leaf1b. Note that the `server_ports`, `switch_ports` and `switches` definitions are paired vertically.
  - `vlans` define which VLANs are allowed on the switch_ports, in this case it is two ranges, VLAN11-12 and VLAN21-22 for the dual-attached server ports and VLAN11 for the iLO port.
```

  - `native_vlan` specifies the native VLAN when the switch port mode is set to trunk.
  - `mode` is set to trunk for the dual-attached server ports and access for the iLO port.
  - `spanning_tree_portfast` defines whether we want the switch port to be a spanning-tree edge port or a network port.
  - `port-channel` defines the description and mode for the port-channel.

## The playbook

In this example, the playbook looks like the following:

```yml
- name: Run AVD
  hosts: FABRIC
  gather_facts: false
  tasks:
    - name: generate intended variables
      import_role:
        name: arista.avd.eos_designs
    - name: generate device intended config and documentation
      import_role:
        name: arista.avd.eos_cli_config_gen
    - name: deploy configuration to device
      import_role:
         name: arista.avd.eos_config_deploy_eapi
```

The name of the playbook is set along with the scope of the playbook, which in this example is the entire `FABRIC`. If you recall, this is a group name defined in the inventory, hence if you want your playbook to only apply to a subset of devices, you can change it here.

This playbook has three tasks that use three roles:

> - `generate intended variables` uses the role `arista.avd.eos_designs`, which will generate structured configuration for each device. This structured configuration can be found in the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/intended/structured_configs` folder.

Reviewer 3: To align with the next bullet point (you can go the other way around):
```suggestion
- `generate intended variables` uses the role `arista.avd.eos_designs`, which generates structured configuration for each device. This structured configuration can be found in the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/intended/structured_configs` folder.
```

- `generate device intended config and documention` uses the role `arista.avd.eos_cli_config_gen`, which generates the actual Arista EOS CLI configurations found in the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/intended/configs` folder, along with the device specific and fabric wide documentation found in the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/documentation/` folder. It relies on the structured configuration generated by `arista.avd.eos_designs`.
- Finally `deploy configuration to device` uses the role `arista.avd.eos_config_deploy_eapi` that pushes the generated configuration to the devices in scope.

> ### If you don't have a lab, but just want to play with the AVD output

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### If you do not have a lab, but just want to play with the AVD output
```

> If you don't have a lab, you can adapt the included playbook to look as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you do not have a lab, you can adapt the included playbook to look as follows:
```

Please look through the folders and files described above to learn more about the output generated by Ansible AVD.

### Executing the playbook

The execution of the playbook should show you the following output:

```shell
user@ubuntu:~/Documents/git_projects/ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls$ ansible-playbook playbook.yml

PLAY [Run AVD] *****************************************************************************************************************************************************************************

TASK [arista.avd.eos_designs : Collection arista.avd version 3.5.0 loaded from /home/user/.ansible/collections/ansible_collections] ******************************************************
ok: [dc1-leaf1a]

TASK [arista.avd.eos_designs : Create required output directories if not present] **********************************************************************************************************
ok: [dc1-leaf1a -> localhost] => (item=/home/user/Documents/git_projects/ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/intended/structured_configs)
ok: [dc1-leaf1a -> localhost] => (item=/home/user/Documents/git_projects/ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/documentation/fabric)
(...)
```

> If you aren't seeing a similar output to the one shown above, make sure:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are not seeing a similar output to the one shown above, make sure:
```

- [Ansible inventory, group vars and naming scheme](#ansible-inventory-group-vars-and-naming-scheme)
  - [Content of the inventory.yml file](#content-of-the-inventoryyml-file)
- [Defining device types](#defining-device-types)
- [Setting fabric-wide configuration parameters](#setting-fabric-wide-configuration-parameters)
- [Setting device specific configuration parameters](#setting-device-specific-configuration-parameters)
- [Specifying network services (VRFs and VLANs) in the EVPN/VXLAN Fabric](#specifying-network-services-vrfs-and-vlans-in-the-evpnvxlan-fabric)
- [Specifying endpoint connectivity in the EVPN/VXLAN Fabric](#specifying-endpoint-connectivity-in-the-evpnvxlan-fabric)
- [The playbook](#the-playbook)
  - [Testing AVD output without a lab](#testing-avd-output-without-a-lab)
  - [Executing the playbook](#executing-the-playbook)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
  - [EVPN not working](#evpn-not-working)

## Introduction

This example is meant to be used as the logical second step introducing AVD to new users, directly following the [Introduction to Ansible and AVD](../../docs/getting-started/intro-to-ansible-and-avd.md) section.

> The idea is that new users with access to virtual switches (using Arista vEOS-lab or cEOS) can learn how to generate configuration and documentation for a complete fabric environment. Users with access to physical switches will have to adapt a few settings. This is all documented inline in the comments included in the YAML files. If a lab with virtual or physical switches is not accessible, fear not. This example can also be used to generate the output from AVD if required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The idea is that new users with access to virtual switches (using Arista vEOS-lab or cEOS) can learn how to generate configuration and documentation for a complete fabric environment. Users with access to physical switches will have to adapt a few settings. This is all documented inline in the comments included in the YAML files. If a lab with virtual or physical switches is not accessible, fear not! This example can also be used to only generate the output from AVD if required.
```

## Installation

> To actually use this example in practice the following is required:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Requirements to use this example:
```

This will show the following:

```shell
 ~/ansible-avd-examples# ansible-playbook arista.avd.install_examples

PLAY [Install Examples]***************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************

TASK [Copy all examples to ~/ansible-avd-examples]*****************************************************************************************************************************************************
changed: [localhost]

PLAY RECAP
****************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************
localhost                  : ok=1    changed=1    unreachable=0    failed=0    skipped=0    rescued=0    ignored=0
```

After the playbook has run successfully, the directory structure will look as shown below, the contents of which will be covered in later sections:

> - ansible-avd-examples/ (or whereever the playbook was run)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ansible-avd-examples/ (or wherever the playbook was run)
```

    - playbook.yml
    - README.md (this document)

> > Please note: If the contents of any files in the example are ***modified*** and the playbook is re-run, those files ***won't*** be overwritten.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Please note: If the content of any file in the example is ***modified*** and the playbook is run again, the file ***will not*** be overwritten.
```

> However, if any files in the example are ***deleted*** and the playbook is re-run, those files will be re-created.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, if any file in the example is ***deleted*** and the playbook is run again, the file will be re-created.
```

copy running-config startup-config
```

The folder `single-dc-l3ls/switch-basic-configurations/` contains a file per device for the initial configuration.

## Ansible inventory, group vars and naming scheme

The following drawing shows a graphic overview of the Ansible inventory, group variables and naming scheme used in this example:

![Figure: Ansible inventory and vars](images/single-dc-inventory-and-vars.png)

> Please note, the two servers (`dc1-leaf1-server1` and `dc1-leaf2-server1`) at the bottom **are not** configured by AVD, but the switch ports used to connect to the servers are.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please note, the two servers `dc1-leaf1-server1` and `dc1-leaf2-server1` at the bottom **are not** configured by AVD, but the switch ports used to connect to the servers are.
```

This naming convention makes it possible to easily extend anything, but as always, this can be changed based on your preferences. Just ensure that the names of all groups and hosts are unique.

### Content of the inventory.yml file

This section describes the full `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/inventory.yml` file used to represent the topology shown above.

> It is important that the hostnames specified in the inventory exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. To test this simply ping each host, for example, `ping dc1-spine1` from the Ansible host.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is important that the hostnames specified in the inventory exist either in DNS or in the hosts file on your Ansible host to allow successful name lookup and be able to reach the switches directly. A successful ping from the Ansible host to each inventory host allows to verify name resolution (e.g. `ping dc1-spine1`).
```

      mgmt_ip: 172.16.1.12/24
```

> Initially the default gateway for the management interface of all devices in DC1 is defined.

Reviewer 3: Just to double check, the snippet above defines a `mgmt_ip` but not a `mgmt_gateway`. is this what is expected?

Author: mgmt_gateway is defined at the very top:

```yml
---
mgmt_gateway: 172.16.1.1
```

The following section defines the spine layer:

- A number of default settings that apply to all nodes with the device type `spine`:
  - `platform` references default settings defined in AVD that are specific to certain switch platforms.
  - `loopback_ipv4_pool` defines the IP scope from which AVD assigns IPv4 addresses for Loopback0.
  - `bgp_as` defines the BGP AS number.
  - `bgp_defaults` defines generic BGP settings.
- `nodes` defines the actual spine switches, using the hostnames defined in the inventory.
  - `id` is used to calculate the various IP addresses, for example, the IPv4 address for the Loopback0 interface. In this case dc1-spine1 will get the IPv4 address 10.255.0.1/27 assigned to the Loopback0 interface.

>   - `mgmt_ip` defines the IPv4 address of the management interface. As stated earlier Ansible will perform name lookup when using the hostnames specified in the inventory, unless using the `ansible-host` option. However there is no automatic mechanism to grab the result of the name lookup and use that to generate the configuration of the actual management interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `mgmt_ip` defines the IPv4 address of the management interface. As stated earlier Ansible will perform name lookup when using the hostnames specified in the inventory, unless using the `ansible_host` option. However there is no automatic mechanism to grab the result of the name lookup and use that to generate the configuration of the actual management interface.
```

        name: L2_VLAN3402
```

> All services in the entire fabric or in other words all VRFs and VLANs are defined here. This means that regardless of where a given VRF or VLAN must exist, its existence is defined here, but it is not defined ***where*** in the fabric it exists. That was done at the bottom of the inventory file previously described in the [Inventory](#inventory) section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All services in the entire fabric or in other words all VRFs and VLANs are defined here. This means that regardless of where a given VRF or VLAN must exist, its existence is defined in this file, but it does not indicate ***where*** in the fabric it exists. That was done at the bottom of the inventory file previously described in the [Inventory](#inventory) section.
```

## Specifying endpoint connectivity in the EVPN/VXLAN Fabric

> As should be clear in the previous section, all VRFs and VLANs across the fabric are now defined. The `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS.yml` file specifies the connectivity for all endpoints in the fabric (typically servers):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the previous section, all VRFs and VLANs across the fabric are now defined. The `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/group_vars/CONNECTED_ENDPOINTS.yml` file specifies the connectivity for all endpoints in the fabric (typically servers):
```

This defines the settings for the relevant switch ports to which the endpoints connect, in this case the two servers `dc1-leaf1-server1` and `dc1-leaf2-server1`.

> The definitions for `dc1-leaf1-server1`, shows the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As an example, here is the configuration for `dc1-leaf1-server1`:
```

This playbook has three tasks that use three roles:

- `generate intended variables` uses the role `arista.avd.eos_designs`, which generates structured configuration for each device. This structured configuration can be found in the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/intended/structured_configs` folder.
- `generate device intended config and documention` uses the role `arista.avd.eos_cli_config_gen`, which generates the actual Arista EOS CLI configurations found in the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/intended/configs` folder, along with the device specific and fabric wide documentation found in the `ansible-avd-examples/single-dc-l3ls/documentation/` folder. It relies on the structured configuration generated by `arista.avd.eos_designs`.
- Finally `deploy configuration to device` uses the role `arista.avd.eos_config_deploy_eapi` that pushes the generated configuration to the devices in scope.

### Testing AVD output without a lab

> The included playbook can be modified to look as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use this example without a lab, the playbook can be modified as follows:
```

    #      name: arista.avd.eos_config_deploy_eapi
```

By simply commenting out (or deleting) the third and last task definition, the playbook will generate all of the output (variables, configurations, documentation), but will not attempt to communicate with any devices.

Please look through the folders and files described above to learn more about the output generated by AVD.

### Executing the playbook

> The execution of the playbook should result in following output:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The execution of the playbook should produce the following output:
```
